RFC: audit assertions (#422)
npm/rfcs: accepted/9999-npm-audit-assertions.md

# `npm audit` assertions

## Summary

A mechanism for module maintainers to assert that their modules are not impacted by advisories.

```

> npm auidit assert --module=<module-name> --id=<advisory identifier> --impactful=<boolean>

Reviewer: minor typo in the `npm audit` command here

Author: ```suggestion
npm audit assert --module=<module-name> --id=<advisory identifier> --impactful=<boolean>
```

- `npm audit` will need to be updated to both consume additional data and provide additional filters.
  - by default, `npm audit` should
    - surface advisories that have no assertions or `--impactful=true` assertions
    - ignore advisories that have `--impactful=false` assertions, **presuming** there are no alternative paths to the advisories that have no assertions or `--impactful=true` assertions
  - the `--assertions` flag should be added
    - it should take the following values:
      - `only`: only show the advisories that have have assertions, `true` or `false`
      - `only-true`: only show the advisories that have `--impactful=true` assertions
      - `only-false`: only show the advisories that have `--impactful=false` assertions
      - `unfiltered`: show all the advisories, regardless of whether they have assertions, `true` or `false`
    - these should probably be sent to the server to be filtered server-side and enable smaller responses.
  - the UI should also display if an assertion has been made, and what that assertion is.
  - `--json` should include assertions, if any exist.

> - They adition of `npm audit assert` will require some kind of change to the server that serves the information that powers `npm audit`. Specifically, this information will need to be acceptted when `npm audit assert` is run, and returned with `npm audit` information. Additionally, depending on how this is implemented, this might reduce the number of requests made and data returned to end-users. Specifically, if the CLI assumes by default that users want to ignore vulnerabilities that have been marked as `--impactful=false` by transitive (or direct) dependencies **and** that is sent to the server, the server can return only what's needed rathter than the full set of data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The addition of `npm audit assert` will require some kind of change to the server that serves the information that powers `npm audit`. Specifically, this information will need to be accepted when `npm audit assert` is run, and returned with `npm audit` information. Additionally, depending on how this is implemented, this might reduce the number of requests made and data returned to end-users. Specifically, if the CLI assumes by default that users want to ignore vulnerabilities that have been marked as `--impactful=false` by transitive (or direct) dependencies **and** that is sent to the server, the server can return only what's needed rather than the full set of data.
```

## Rationale and Alternatives

- Do nothing: The current state of the world that has caused [pain](https://overreacted.io/npm-audit-broken-by-design/).
- Allow reporters to mark which modules are impacted: not really scalable, especially since reporters won't be experts in the same way that maintainers are.
- Do something in a neutral space, run by an independent organization: There's no reason this couldn't eventually be implemented under this API. It is contingent on that work being done and being successfully adopted by others. That shouldn't necessarily prevent us from implementing this and mapping it over to that later.

> 

Reviewer 3: I think what this gets at is that there may other tools that will want to use the "asserted" data. The npm repository seems like a reasonable option for the data as it already the source of truth for the package itself. A few ideas off the top of my head:
* provide a way to get the asserted data for a module without using the npm client (existing UI?, REST enpoint?)
* Include the data when a module is installed/updated, that would like the local copy be used by other tools. 
allow other tools to leverage the data.

Author: I would assume this data would be included with existing package metadata and therefore accessible how people already access package metadata.

Reviewer 4: Agree here mostly. To get the broader industry support I think this needs to be successful, we will need a well documented schema and set of api's.  This feedback is something I have heard from multiple people.

I think the schema and api to load these counter claims needs to be platform agnostic. I think that even "publish this to the npm registry" should be an implementation detail for npm. Preferably npm would just build a client for this contract, or at maybe we need an "extensions" to the api so that npm could say "instead of a GET request to your provider server, install package `foo` and read file `claims.json`".  Again, this is just rough ideas.

This solution both begins to address the problem that exists presently, doesn't exclude potential external solutions/patterns from being adopted in the future, and allows an implementation to be implemented with _relative_ haste.

## Implementation

{{Give a high-level overview of implementation requirements and concerns. Be specific about areas of code that need to change, and what their potential effects are. Discuss which repositories and sub-components will be affected, and what its overall code effect might be.}}

{{THIS SECTION IS REQUIRED FOR RATIFICATION -- you can skip it if you don't know the technical details when first submitting the proposal, but it must be there before it's accepted}}

## Prior Art

I've not seen other tools doing this, but I would be surprised if there's not prior art. After some searching, I can't find anthing.

> 

Reviewer 3: @naugtur links to your work as prior art would be good here.

Reviewer 5: I'm working on a clean schema to PR to pkg collab space. Maybe I'll finish on Friday.
I thought this RFC is kept as a historical record. I should create a new one or rewrite this totally.

Reviewer 6: The closest that I'm aware of is [Snyk's "Runtime prioritization"](https://snyk.io/product/open-source-security-management/):

> Prioritize your fixes based on an analysis of the vulnerabilities that are called at runtime of the application and bear a higher risk

One way of defining "impactful" could be "is an affected function called by the dependency: if it isn't, then it's presumably not an 'impactful' vulnerability".

Reviewer 5: Oh wait, it's a different RFC 😅 
I'll share links soon then. Thx

Reviewer 5: This explains plans and links to most of the stuff
https://dev.to/naugtur/do-you-need-help-with-your-npm-audit-3olf

Reviewer 5: And a direct link to the tool
https://www.npmjs.com/package/npm-audit-resolver

Reviewer 5: Format for storing and exchanging assertions/decisions/resolutions/thingies

## Unresolved Questions and Bikeshedding

- The potential values for the `--assertions` filter on `npm audit` could probably be bikeshedded a bit. I'm unattached to the names.
- UI in `npm audit` outpit could be bikeshedded as well.

> - It would be cool if there was the ability to have multiple maintainers run `npm audit assert` for a given `id` and surface that _multiple_ people signed off on the assertion as a way to begin combatting some forms of social engineering attacks we've seen in the past, but that might be too complex for now.

Reviewer 3: It would be good if there was a way for third parties to make assertions, and then end users decide which third parties they would trust.

Author: I disagree with this, but I could see a potential argument for it.

It seems like a product space that could be explored by companies (for example, Sonatype Nexus or jFrog Artifactory) but adding in additional complexity of "trust external authorities" to users who are already innundated with options is complexity that I'm not sure I want to make users have to care about. What happens when someone trusts `giithub` rahter than `github`, `synk` rather than `snyk`, or `IḄM` rather than `IBM`? There are solutions here but it's just unnecessary complexity in a solution that's inteded to help solve complexity.

Reviewer 4: This is what I was meaning in my number 5 point above. Having multiple sources of trust here is also important. I even think we might need to go so far as to provide a way to trust opinions in a "scope". For example to say "I trust the `express` team on modules provided by them, but not on the ones provided by the `react` team which might be shared".

And to go even one step further, I think you would want to only trust the `express` maintainers for transitives imported as part of their dep tree exclusivly.  So if there was a shared dependency `express > path-to-regexp` and `react-router > path-to-regexp` then you would still need to report on `path-to-regexp` even if the `express` counter claim said it could be ignored.

Reviewer 7: Who do you trust is a crucial point here.
In general maintainers don't want to include vulnerabilities in their packages, but they do, on accident. That's why it's great that there are neutral people looking at these packages and creating CVE-s.

In the same fashion, most maintainers don't want to sign off dependencies as safe when they are not, but again: mistakes happen. We are trusting the same person not to make a mistake, but this time there is no third party to verify the claim (of course, we could have CVE-s listing false claims, but that would recreate the situation we have today, or even worse). 

Not to mention that maintainers have strong incentives to sign off packages with minimal time spent looking into all the possible ramifications: if your package produces lots of `npm audit` hits, you receive lots of issues. If you claim that all your dependencies are safe, you get less issues...

# `npm audit` assertions

## Summary

A mechanism for module maintainers to assert that their modules are not impacted by advisories.

```
npm audit assert --module=<module-name> --id=<advisory identifier> --impactful=<boolean> --comment=<string with reasoning>
```

> 

Author: Personal note from deep dive: Add more context about historical initiatives here.

Further, the amount of noise that `npm audit` generates from transitive dependencies that rely on a "vulnerable" module where there is no world in which the "vulnerability" can be exploited leads to people ignoring `npm audit` rather than leveraging it to actually address vulnerabilities.

Enabling maintainers of dependencies - most importantly, dependencies that are most often transitive - to assert that their dependencies are not impacted by known vulnerabilities is a way to dramatically reduce the amount of pain that `npm audit` creates.

Further, this creates an additional cascading signal of _validity_ when the maintainers of a transitive dependency mark the advisory as impactful. As maintainers make assertions, we get more context about the impact of advisories across the ecosytem, which - if surfaced to end-users through `npm audit` - helps provide more context to make an informted decision about how to address advisories that they're seeing.

## Detailed Explanation

- `npm audit assert` will be added with the following arguments:

>   - `--module=<module-name>` **(required)** where `<module-name>` is the name of the module having an assertion made. If I was a maintainer of `fastify` and wanted to make an assertion about it, I'd use `--module=fastify`.

Reviewer 5: (nit) Why module not package? I thought NPM calls them packages everywhere.

Reviewer 2: Indeed; a module is a file; vulns are reported against packages.

>   - `--id=<advisory identifier>` **(required)** is the identifier of the advisory that impacts my module that I'm making an assertion about. As a hypothetical maintainer of `fastify` wanting to make to make an assertion about the npm advisory `1726`, I'd use `--id=1726`. This also potentially allows for future expansion into other identifiers. For example, if I wanted to make an assertion about `CVE-2021-28562` advisory, I'd use `--id=CVE-2021-28562`. I'd love to see namespacing, like `npm-1726`, but I could understand why people might be against that.

Reviewer 5: **Deep dive on the granularity used for targeting vulnerabilities/dependencies.**

TL;DR: module+id may not be enough for the most widespread usecase.

If assertions are only identified by Advisory ID and module name, it makes only one kind of assertions possible - counter-claims by the maintainer on CVEs reported against the package.
While this is simple to define and immensely valuable for the particular usecase, I'd argue it's not the majority usecase.

What seems more likely is a major package with active maintainers depends (directly or not) on a small package with hobby-level support. Now a CVE reported against the small package is more likely to be a result of a script scanning for potentially vulnerable code and on top of that - it's often the case that the small package is not used by the major package in a way that's exploitable (or at all). And last but not least, it's the major package that's likely to have the resources to investigate.

Specific example of a relationship with a vulnerable package:
Imagine a valid CVE for a small package A which is an indirect dependency of a large and popular package B. 
The vulnerability is there and no valid counter-claim can be made for package A.
Package B though has a dependency Q in dependency W that only uses package A for one functionality that B never uses (Q is a toolbox style library)
Maintainer of A is not in a position to counter anything. Maintainer of B needs to specify that the specific path in their dependencies: B:W>Q>A with specific CVE ID is not affecting the operations of package B.

**The ability to declare a vulnerable dependency is not affecting a major package is what can make a noticeable dent in the number of vulnerabilities reported by npm audit even without counter-claims being widely adopted.** And it's not my main usecase - it's the first thing I heard when I talked to Package Maintenance WG a while back.

I'm close to publishing the initial proposal for the format to store and exchange counter-claims (I call them decisions, because they're a bit more than a boolean with explanation). I'll publish it to https://github.com/openjs-foundation/pkg-vuln-collab-space and mention here too.

I suggest assertions accept:
- module+id when conter-claiming a CVE reported for the package itself
- module+id+path when counter-claiming a CVE reported for a dependency
